Added Insights Doc (#1268)
inngest/website: pages/docs/platform/monitor/insights.mdx

## Getting Started

Access Insights through the Inngest dashboard by clicking on the "Insights" tab in the left navigation. 

![Getting Started Dashboard View](/assets/docs/platform/monitor/insights/insights_dashboard_view.png)

We have several pre-built query templates to help you get started exploring your data.

![Getting Started Templates View](/assets/docs/platform/monitor/insights/insights_template_view.png)

## SQL Editor

The Insights interface includes a full-featured SQL editor where you can:

- Write and execute SQL queries against your event data
- Save frequently used queries for later access
- View query results in an organized table format
- Access query history and templates from the sidebar

![Sql Editor View](/assets/docs/platform/monitor/insights/insights_sql_editor.png)

### Available Columns

When querying events, you have access to the following columns:

| Column | Type | Description |
|--------|------|-------------|
| `id` | String | Unique identifier for the event |
| `name` | String | The name/type of the event |
| **`data`** | **JSON** | **The event payload data - users can send any JSON structure here** |

> | `ts` | Unix timestamp | Unix timestamp when the event occurred - [reference](https://www.unixtimestamp.com/)  |

Reviewer: I think it's still important to mention it's milliseconds. Unix timestamp by itself usually refers to seconds

Author: fixed

Reviewer: cool, looks good to go from my end

import { Info } from "src/shared/Docs/mdx";

export const description = 'Query and analyze event data with SQL in the Inngest platform.';

# Insights

Inngest Insights allows you to query and analyze your event data using SQL directly within the Inngest platform. Every event sent to Inngest contains valuable information, and Insights gives you the power to extract meaningful patterns and analytics from that data.

<Info>

>   Insights support is currently in Public Beta. Some details including SQL syntax and feature availability are still subject to change during this period. Read more about the Public Beta [roadmap here](#roadmap).

Reviewer: not sure if we should link to https://www.inngest.com/docs/release-phases as well

- Save and reuse common queries
- Analyze patterns in your event streams
- Extract business intelligence from your workflows

Currently, you can **only query events**. Support for querying function runs will be added in future releases.

## Getting Started

Access Insights through the Inngest dashboard by clicking on the "Insights" tab in the left navigation. 

![Getting Started Dashboard View](/assets/docs/platform/monitor/insights/insights_dashboard_view.png)

We have several pre-built query templates to help you get started exploring your data.

![Getting Started Templates View](/assets/docs/platform/monitor/insights/insights_template_view.png)

## SQL Editor

The Insights interface includes a full-featured SQL editor where you can:

- Write and execute SQL queries against your event data
- Save frequently used queries for later access
- View query results in an organized table format
- Access query history and templates from the sidebar

![Sql Editor View](/assets/docs/platform/monitor/insights/insights_sql_editor.png)

### Available Columns

When querying events, you have access to the following columns:

| Column | Type | Description |
|--------|------|-------------|

> | `event_id` | String | Unique identifier for the event |

Reviewer: Bringing comment from notion https://www.notion.so/Insights-Documentation-26bb64753bbd8022a14efe8fa81977a3?d=271b64753bbd80feb560001cc34244f9&source=copy_link#271b64753bbd80f3bca3fb976684ff96

this one is super weird and we will likely have to expose another id-ish column too… it’ll either be a randomly generated ULID or an id the user sent to us. Check out https://www.notion.so/When-receiving-event-id-is-either-1c1b64753bbd80119df9c51d0ebf1c6d?pvs=24#1c1b64753bbd8017bd85c89db1b232d5 for more context

| `event_name` | String | The name/type of the event |
| **`event_data`** | **JSON** | **The event payload data - users can send any JSON structure here** |

> | `event_ts` | DateTime | Timestamp when the event occurred |

Reviewer: this is a unix millis timestamp. Not sure what the best reference to link would be, maybe https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_time or https://www.unixtimestamp.com/. Usually unix timestamps are in seconds so * 1000 to get “unix millis”

> | `event_id` | String | Unique identifier for the event |
> | `event_name` | String | The name/type of the event |
> | **`event_data`** | **JSON** | **The event payload data - users can send any JSON structure here** |
> | `event_ts` | DateTime | Timestamp when the event occurred |
> | `event_v` | String | Event format version |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `id` | String | Unique identifier for the event |
| `name` | String | The name/type of the event |
| **`data`** | **JSON** | **event payload data that you sent to Inngest** |
| `ts` | DateTime | Timestamp when the event occurred |
| `v` | String | Event format version |
```

For more details on the event format, see the [Inngest Event Format documentation](https://www.inngest.com/docs/features/events-triggers/event-format).

### Data Retention

> You can query events from **up to 30 days in the past**. Older events are not available through Insights.

Reviewer: The history is according to their plan now https://www.inngest.com/pricing

### Result Limits

- Current page limit: **1000 rows**
- Future updates will support larger result sets through async data exports

> - Pagination support is planned for future releases

Reviewer: I would leave this point out, we might implement frontend pagination but I don't think that's worth mentioning

## SQL Support

Insights is built on ClickHouse, which provides powerful SQL capabilities with some differences from traditional SQL databases.

![Sql Editor View](/assets/docs/platform/monitor/insights/insights_query_results.png)

### Supported Functions

#### Arithmetic Functions
Basic mathematical operations and calculations.
[View ClickHouse arithmetic functions documentation](https://clickhouse.com/docs/sql-reference/functions/arithmetic-functions)

#### String Functions
String manipulation and search capabilities.
- [String search functions](https://clickhouse.com/docs/sql-reference/functions/string-search-functions)
- [String manipulation functions](https://clickhouse.com/docs/sql-reference/functions/string-functions)

#### JSON Functions

> Essential for working with `event_data` payloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Essential for working with `events.data` payloads.
```

[View ClickHouse date/time functions documentation](https://clickhouse.com/docs/sql-reference/functions/date-time-functions)

#### Other Supported Function Categories
- [Logical functions](https://clickhouse.com/docs/sql-reference/functions/logical-functions)
- [Rounding functions](https://clickhouse.com/docs/sql-reference/functions/rounding-functions)
- [Type conversion functions](https://clickhouse.com/docs/sql-reference/functions/type-conversion-functions)
- [Functions for nulls](https://clickhouse.com/docs/sql-reference/functions/functions-for-nulls)
- [ULID functions](https://clickhouse.com/docs/sql-reference/functions/ulid-functions)

### Aggregate Functions

The following aggregate functions are supported:

| Function | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `ARRAY_AGG()` | Aggregates values into an array* |
| `AVG()` | Calculates average |
| `COUNT()` | Counts rows |
| `MAX()` | Finds maximum value |
| `MIN()` | Finds minimum value |
| `STDDEV_POP()` | Population standard deviation |
| `STDDEV_SAMP()` | Sample standard deviation |
| `SUM()` | Calculates sum |
| `VAR_POP()` | Population variance |
| `VAR_SAMP()` | Sample variance |
| `median()` | Finds median value |

> > **\*Note on ARRAY_AGG**: Due to a current serialization bug, you need to convert arrays to strings using `toString(ARRAY_AGG(column_name))`.

Reviewer: this is fixed so we can delete it

> [View complete ClickHouse aggregate functions documentation](https://clickhouse.com/docs/sql-reference/aggregate-functions/reference)

Reviewer: We don't support any functions on this list other than the 10 or so from the table above, so I think we should either leave this link out or link each row to the specific ClickHouse docs page

### SQL Syntax Limitations

Some SQL features are not yet supported but are planned for future releases:

- **CTEs (Common Table Expressions)** using `WITH`
- **`IS` operator**
- **`NOT` operator**

## Working with Event Data

### Common Schema vs Event-Specific Schema

**Common Schema**: These columns are available for every user and every event:
- `event_id`
- `event_name` 
- `event_ts`
- `event_v`
- `event_data`

> **Event-Specific Schema**: Within **`event_data`**, users can send any JSON they want, so the structure and available fields will be specific to their payloads. You can use ClickHouse's JSON functions to extract and query specific fields within your event data.

Reviewer: I think the table you had above already explained the common columns well, so I think this section could just advise to use JSON functions to dig through `data` keys

### Example Queries

#### Basic Event Filtering
```sql
SELECT count(*)
FROM events

> WHERE event_name = 'inngest/function.failed'
> AND simpleJSONExtractString(event_data, 'function_id') = 'generate-report'
> AND event_ts > toUnixTimestamp(addHours(now(), -1)) * 1000;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WHERE name = 'inngest/function.failed'
AND simpleJSONExtractString(data, 'function_id') = 'generate-report'
AND ts > toUnixTimestamp(addHours(now(), -1)) * 1000;
```

```

#### Extracting JSON Data and Aggregating
```sql

> SELECT simpleJSONExtractString(event_data, 'user_id') as user_id, count(*) 
> FROM events
> WHERE event_name = 'order.created'
> GROUP BY user_id
> ORDER BY count(*) DESC
> LIMIT 10;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT simpleJSONExtractString(data, 'user_id') as user_id, count(*) 
FROM events
WHERE name = 'order.created'
GROUP BY user_id
ORDER BY count(*) DESC
LIMIT 10;
```

```

## Saved Queries

> You can save frequently used queries for quick access. Currently, saved queries are stored in your browser's local storage.
> 
> > **Note**: Saved queries are only available on the device and browser where you created them. Cloud synchronization of saved queries is planned for a future release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can save frequently used queries for quick access.
```

Backend saving is implemented now

## Common Errors and Troubleshooting

> ### Array Serialization Issues
> When using `ARRAY_AGG()`, you must convert the result to a string:
> 
> **Correct:**
> ```sql
> SELECT toString(ARRAY_AGG(event_id)) as event_ids FROM events
> ```
> 
> **Incorrect:**
> ```sql
> SELECT ARRAY_AGG(event_id) as event_ids FROM events  -- This will cause serialization errors
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

this bug is fixed

## Roadmap

### Coming Soon
- Query support for function runs
- `received_at` column for tracking event receipt time
- Pagination for large result sets
- Async data exports for results larger than 1000 rows

### Future Enhancements
- Support for CTEs (Common Table Expressions)
- `IS` and `NOT` operators

> - Cloud synchronization for saved queries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
